Fragment arguments/variables (syntax/validation/execution) (#1081)
graphql/graphql-spec: spec/Section 5 -- Validation.md

FieldsInSetCanMerge(set):

- Let {visitedSelections} be the selections in {set} including visiting
  fragments and inline fragments and applying any supplied fragment spread
  arguments.
- Let {spreadsForName} be the set of fragment spreads with a given name in
  {visitedSelections}.
- Given each pair of members {spreadA} and {spreadB} in {spreadsForName}:

>   - {spreadA} and {spreadB} must have identical sets of arguments.

Reviewer: Should we specify "must have identical sets of arugments and values?"

Reviewer: and directives?

Author: I actually hadn't thought about directives, that's a great point!

- Let {fieldsForName} be the set of field selections with a given response name

>   in {visitedSelections}.

Reviewer 2: The `{fieldA} and {fieldB} must have identical sets of arguments.` line a few lines below this may be problematic. For example:

```graphql
query Q ($dogCommand: DogCommand!) {
  pet {
    doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $dogCommand)
    ...frag(command: $dogCommand)
  }
}

fragment frag($command: DogCommand!) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}
```

Here you have two visited fields:

- `doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $dogCommand)`
- `doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)`

The first uses the operation variable `$dogCommand`. The second uses the local fragment variable `$command` which technically resolves to the operation variable `$dogCommand` in this usage. I think this query should be seen as valid, so I think that fragment arguments should be resolved away during validation; either to a literal value, or to the underlying operation variable. This does *not* require that you know the variable _values_ during validation (we must not require this!), only that you know the name of the operation variable that would be used.

Reviewer 2: Essentially, I think what I'm saying is that fragment arguments could be seen entirely as syntactic sugar, and could be entirely resolved via AST transform on the client side (or a server middleware) with no difference in observed behavior on the server. Not that they _should_ be, but that they _could_ be.

Author: Made a proof of concept here https://github.com/JoviDeCroock/graphql-js/pull/5/commits/755dd5af6317feb4b05eba4fd589ee5504907694

Reviewer 2: > if I am hearing you correctly there would be a step before validation and after parse where we effectively stub in the argument-value or variable reference?

To be clear, in spec terms, this probably wouldn't happen. Just that if someone were to do this, it would be equivalent. If we use that as a mental model, it might be clarifying around all the edge cases, is what I'm thinking - and would enforce a kind of consistency.

FieldsInSetCanMerge(set):

- Let {visitedSelections} be the selections in {set} including visiting fields,

>   fragment-spreads and inline fragments.

Reviewer 2: If we visit fields, we'll get the entire tree. We only want to visit the fragment spreads/inline fragments.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in my PR below

}
```

Fragment spread arguments can also cause fields to fail to merge.

```graphql example
fragment commandFragment($command: DogCommand!) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}

fragment potentiallyConflictingArguments(
  $commandOne: DogCommand!
) on Dog {
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandOne)
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandTwo)
}

fragment safeFragmentArguments on Dog {
  ...potentiallyConflictingArguments(commandOne: SIT, commandTwo: DOWN)

> }

Author: I tried my best to make it a bit better 😅

> }

Reviewer 2: Here we call the fragment with two arguments:
```graphql
query {
  pet {
    ...potentiallyConflictingArguments(commandOne: SIT, commandTwo: DOWN)
  }
}
```

The fragment defines only one variable, so the other variable, `$commandTwo`, is assumed to be global. This does not align with how it is called above.

```graphql
fragment potentiallyConflictingArguments(
  $commandOne: DogCommand!
) on Dog {
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandOne)
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandTwo)
}
```

> }

Author: Oh gotcha, sorry I missed that

}
```

Fragment spread arguments can also cause fields to fail to merge.

```graphql example
fragment commandFragment($command: DogCommand!) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}

fragment potentiallyConflictingArguments(

>   $commandOne: DogCommand!

Author: ```suggestion
  $commandOne: DogCommand!
  $commandTwo: DogCommand!
```

}
```

Fragment spread arguments can also cause fields to fail to merge.

> ```graphql example

Reviewer 2: This example is explicitly not valid, right?

````suggestion
```graphql counter-example
````

fragment commandFragment($command: DogCommand!) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}

fragment potentiallyConflictingArguments(
  $commandOne: DogCommand!
  $commandTwo: DogCommand!
) on Dog {
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandOne)
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandTwo)
}

query {
  pet {
    ...potentiallyConflictingArguments(commandOne: SIT, commandTwo: DOWN)
  }
}
```

If two fragment spreads with the same name, and hence the same selection, supply
different argument values, their fields will not be able to merge. In this case,
validation fails because the fragment spread `...commandFragment(command: SIT)`
and `...commandFragment(command: DOWN)` are part of the visited selections that
will be merged.

> If both of these spreads would have `$commandOne` or `$commandTwo` as the
> argument-value, it would be allowed as we can be sure that we'd resolve
> identical fields.

Reviewer 2: `or` here would not be interpreted as an exclusive or. Let's be more explicit:

```suggestion
If both of these spreads had used `$commandOne` as the argument value, it would
be allowed as we can be sure that we'd resolve identical fields.
```

Though of course it would not be valid since then `potentiallyConflictingArguments` would define an argument that wasn't used. Instead, maybe add an example that is valid?

Reviewer 2: Another way to potentially make this valid is to call it as `...potentiallyConflictingArguments(commandOne: SIT, commandTwo: SIT)` or even `...potentiallyConflictingArguments(commandOne: $dogCommand, commandTwo: $dogCommand)` where `$dogCommand` is an operation variable.

}
```

Fragment spread arguments can also cause fields to fail to merge.

While the following is valid:

```graphql example
fragment commandFragment($command: DogCommand!) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}

fragment potentiallyConflictingArguments(
  $commandOne: DogCommand!
  $commandTwo: DogCommand!
) on Dog {
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandOne)
  ...commandFragment(command: $commandTwo)

> }

Author: I think it's good to allow for `...commandFragment ...commandFragment` (two argumentless fragment-spreads) for backwards compatability and `...commandFragment(a: $a) ...commandFragment(a: $a)` because they are the same which in my mind ties intuitively into the former case while the different arguments should be disallowed for ease of reasoning otherwise we'd have to go into the fragment-spreads and analyse whether this changed variable results in conflicting fields due to arguments on the field or `@include/@skip`/...

> }

Reviewer 2: I agree with Matt - this should use the same logic as field usage. This would thus be invalid for the same reason that this query (and a query using any two of these three fields) would be invalid:

```graphql
query ($id1: ID! = "ZmlsbXM6MQ==", $id2: ID! = "ZmlsbXM6MQ==") {
  node(id: "ZmlsbXM6MQ==") { id }
  node(id: $id1) { id }
  node(id: $id2) { id }
}
```

[Example on SWAPI](http://graphql.github.io/swapi-graphql/?query=query%20(%24id1%3A%20ID!%20%3D%20%22ZmlsbXM6MQ%3D%3D%22%2C%20%24id2%3A%20ID!%20%3D%20%22ZmlsbXM6MQ%3D%3D%22)%20%7B%0A%20%20node(id%3A%20%22ZmlsbXM6MQ%3D%3D%22)%20%7B%20id%20%7D%0A%20%20node(id%3A%20%24id1)%20%7B%20id%20%7D%0A%20%20node(id%3A%20%24id2)%20%7B%20id%20%7D%0A%7D)

> }

Author: Made it more clear in https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1081/commits/03ba25598f7520c05b3dfb27697a84de76829c2e

## Arguments

Arguments are provided to fields, fragment spreads and directives. The following
validation rules apply in each case.

### Argument Names

**Formal Specification**

- For each {argument} in the document:
  - Let {argumentName} be the Name of {argument}.
  - If the parent is a field or directive:
  - Let {argumentDefinition} be the argument or variable definition named
    {argumentName} provided by the parent field definition, directive definition

>     or fragment definition.

Author: This looks all right to me, like the other blocks that go multi-line

>     or fragment definition.

Reviewer 2: Probably a bug in Refined GitHub, they do mess up the rendering of diffs from time to time. Closing.

}
```

> The above is also applicable to fragment-definitions and fragment-spreads, each
> variable must be defined by the fragment-definition before it can be inserted as
> an argument by the fragment-spread.

Author: ```suggestion
The above is also applicable to fragment definitions and fragment spreads, each
variable must be defined by the fragment definition before it can be inserted as
an argument by the fragment spread.
```

}

query {
  pet {
    ...potentiallyConflictingArguments(commandOne: SIT, commandTwo: DOWN)
  }
}
```

If two fragment spreads with the same name, and hence the same selection, supply
different argument values, their fields will not be able to merge. In this case,
validation fails because the fragment spread `...commandFragment(command: SIT)`
and `...commandFragment(command: DOWN)` are part of the visited selections that
will be merged.

If both of these spreads had used the same value for the argument value, it
would be allowed as we can be sure that we would resolve identical fields.
Spreads that use different variables that would always resolve to the same value
are also valid. For example, the following is valid:

```graphql example
fragment commandFragment($command: DogCommand!) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}

fragment noConflictWhenPassedOperationCommand(
  $fragmentCommand: DogCommand!
) on Dog {
  ...commandFragment(command: $operationCommand)
  ...commandFragment(command: $fragmentCommand)
}

query($operationCommand: DogCommand!) {
  pet {
    ...noConflictWhenPassedOperationCommand(fragmentCommand: $operationCommand)
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Fixed in my PR below

fragment argOnOptional on Dog {
  isHouseTrained(atOtherHomes: true) @include(if: true)
}

fragment withFragmentArg($command: DogCommand) on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(dogCommand: $command)
}

fragment usesFragmentArg on Dog {
  ...withFragmentArg(command: DOWN)
}

> ```

Author: Added in https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1081/commits/969f692fdcc466e9b9c730a624f567361080b6cf#diff-607ee7e6b71821eecadde7d92451b978e8a75e23d596150950799dc5f8afa43eR719

The following is invalid since `command` is not defined on
`Dog.doesKnowCommand`.

```graphql counter-example
fragment invalidArgName on Dog {
  doesKnowCommand(command: CLEAN_UP_HOUSE)
}
```

> and this is also invalid as the variable `dogCommand` is not defined on fragment

Reviewer 2: Oh no wait this is that weird thing where we're calling them variables like operation variables rather than arguments... In which case, we should reference "the variable `$dogCommand`"?

I think calling them arguments makes more sense here at least. We'll have to be careful with this.

}
```

> Likewise, it is valid for both an operation and a fragment to define a variable

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1081/commits/48fa841ae59036d7721b3b5d2838f01a9f346eda, does that sound better?

is also defined on an operation:

```graphql example
query C($atOtherHomes: Boolean) {

>   ...HouseTrainedFragment

Reviewer 2: This fragment is not defined?

Author: Added!

    transitively.
  - For each {fragment} in {fragments}:
    - For each {variableUsage} in scope of {fragment}, variable must be in

>       {fragment}'s or {operation}'s variable list.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth making it clear this is a "logical or" (allowing both to be true) rather than an "exclusive or" (XOR) which is more commonly how a layman interprets the word `or`.

${atOtherHomes} is not defined by the operation.

Fragments complicate this rule. Any fragment transitively included by an

> operation has access to the variables defined by that operation and defined on
> the fragment. Fragments can appear within multiple operations and therefore

Reviewer 2: This is kind of fine as-is but reads a little ambiguously if the read is not careful (as if the variable has to be defined in both places). Adding `also those` seems to clarify this:

```suggestion
operation has access to the variables defined by that operation and also those defined on
the fragment. Fragments can appear within multiple operations and therefore
```

}
```

Fragment arguments can shadow operation variables: fragments that use an
argument are not using the operation-defined variable of the same name.

> Likewise, it would be invalid if the variable was shadowed by a fragment
> argument:

Reviewer 2: This is really hard to express. Perhaps something like:

```suggestion
As such, it would be invalid if the operation defined a variable and variables of that name were used exclusively inside fragments that define a variable with the same name:
```

This document is not valid because {queryWithExtraVar} defines an extraneous
variable.

### All Fragment Variables Used

**Formal Specification**

- For every {fragment} in the document:
  - Let {variables} be the variables defined by that {fragment}.

>   - Each {variable} in {variables} must be used at least once in the fragment's
>     scope.

Reviewer 2: I think `scope` might be poorly defined; e.g. it could be interpretted to include fragments spread within it. Perhaps:
```suggestion
  - Each {variable} in {variables} must be used at least once transitively within the fragment's selection set excluding traversal of named fragment spreads.
```
